many inventions have changed the world
quite like the mobile phone has in 1973
the first-ever call was made from a
phone dubbed the brick because of its
size
Sammy McGregor would look said how much
has changed since then they are an
inseparable part of our lives from rare
high-tech novelty to a thing almost
everyone has it all in 40 years 40 years
to the day since this man Martin Cooper
using that phone made the first ever
mobile phone call his phone weighed over
a kilo and its battery lasted just 20
minutes much has changed and given the
phones weren't widely available or
affordable until the mid to late 1980s
the pace of that change has been
incredible in its first 40 years the
mobile phones progress has gone from
zero to saturation point annual revenues
of the mobile phone industry today are
worth 1.2 trillion dollars there are
seven billion mobile phone customers in
2012 there were 1.75 billion mobile
phone sales the first year sales went
down it is predicted that in 2013 there
will be more mobile phones and
subscriptions than people on the planet
mobile telephones today are so much more
than mobile telephones they've become
devices for taking and sharing pictures
of connecting to the Internet of sending
and receiving texts and emails in a way
they've become the fulcrum around which
so much of our lives are today balanced
it's difficult to remember what life was
like without them it's your ambition of
the technology is fascinating I mean if
you look at major news events that have
happened over the past 5 10 years you
know you look at the likes of Syria like
Egypt for example I mean part of that
has been mobile you know people have
learned about the issues involved
because of mobile phones and because of
watching videos filmed by people on the
ground it's a very very powerful
technology their spread has
revolutionized the way we do business
mobile phone shops
dominate our urban landscape our
increasing reliance on them has even
changed our behavior and the way we
interact with the real world around us
for now most of us think it's all for
the better probably and as to the next
40 years of the mobile phone and what
will they bring the experts will tell
you they simply don't know simon
mcgregor would al jazeera london so you
saw him in our report and i am pleased
to say that Martin Cooper who made that
first call from a mobile phone in 1973
joins us now from Del Mar in California
Martin good to talk to you how are you
sir
I'm just wonderful are you doing I'm
terrific better now that I'm talking to
you but but how does it feel you don't
get to ask this question of many people
but how does it feel to have literally
change the world well as long as you say
that it's for the better it feels
wonderful yeah I think so what would you
agree that it's changed it for the
better well I think so I'm inspired when
I see the way in which people use their
phones to make their lives better of
course that's the whole purpose of any
technology if it doesn't make your life
better it's not good technology you have
a sense of satisfaction
are you gratified with what your
contribution is to a communications well
for the most part yes but I think we've
only just started I think that the
potential for improving people's lives
by connecting them using the phone using
computer technology using the internet
the potential is much much greater than
what we've done we were about to have
revolutions that will make the cell
phone revolution fail really did you
have a lot of naysayers back in the day
as we say who thought the work that you
and your team we're doing was was
essentially a waste of time
oh absolutely we had a marketing expert
expert I tell us that the total
potential for cell phones in London was
12,000 user season would never have any
more than that so we spent at Motorola a
hundred billion dollars between 1973 and
1983 without getting
any revenues well you could imagine what
our financial people have thought about
yeah Kenny what was your what was your
reaction when you made that first call
from Manhattan and who did you call well
the reaction was very fun sir because
remember now this is their one-of-a-kind
phone and the fact that at work was just
wonderful but I decided I was with a
journalist like herself and I decided to
the guy that I oughta call is my
counterpart at the L system the concept
of cellular was created by Bell
Laboratories and they were building the
what they thought was going to be the
first cell system yeah and it's going to
be car telephones can you imagine that
we've been trapped a hundred years in
our houses and and had tied to our desk
and now we're going to be trapped in
that hers Wow and we thought I was ready
for personal communication so I called
Joel Engel and I said Joel I'm calling
you from a cell phone a real cell phone
Wow personal portable handheld cell
phone and there was sound to the other
end of the line and to this day Joel
doesn't remember that call that and I'm
not sure I play
hmm hey why did it take it is a little
footnote that maybe a lot of folks are
aware of but why did it take so long I
did some reading that says it took about
17 years from that initial phone call
for mobile communications to really
become fully developed and marketed to
the world why'd it take so long well the
first 10 years it took us that longest
to create to make this technology
practical yeah no forever there were no
personal computers no digital cameras
none of those in the no internet none of
those things existed in 1973 so we have
the technology we have to go through the
bureaucratic processes of picking out
who are gonna be the carriers so it took
10 years just to have the first
commercial cell phone and then a
hand-held cell phone in 1983 cost four
thousand US dollars now that's a to
about $10,000 today so it took a while
to get the price down so that many
people could have worked
Martin what a pleasure to talk to you
congratulations you change the world
doggone it did it's a it's a real
pleasure to speak with you my pleasure
all right let's get to the day of sports
now the man is here Rahul 10 grams
refine you've all probably afford that
Tony we're going to start in Spain where
both those Wednesdays Champions League
quarter-finals first legs are taking
place nine time winners Real Madrid are
hosting turkeys Galatasaray coach Jose
Mourinho hooking up with two of his
former Chargers in Didier Drogba and
Wesley Sneijder just a few minutes gone
there nil nil at the burn about
meanwhile many people's Dark Horse's for
the competition Borussia Dortmund take
their unbeaten record and this season's
competition to Malaga also goalless
there meanwhile Real Madrid are one of
the club's being investigated by the
European Commission for receiving
illegal state aid the club were alleged
to have colluded with their City Council
over the price of land around the
bernabéu Stadium we are obviously
looking at these allegations including
those concerning Real Madrid but at this
stage we are analyzing information which
is available to us and the Commission
hasn't yet decided if it's going to open
up a formal investigation back to the
Champions League and Leo Messi's
hamstring injury may not be as bad as
first feared it could be back to face
PSG